v8.5.6: dm experimentally supports foreign key (#22616)
pingcap/docs: dm/dm-safe-mode.md

    syncer-config-name: "global"            # Name of the syncers configuration.
```

## Foreign key handling (experimental)

> **Note:**
>
> This feature is available starting from v8.5.6 and is experimental.

When you enable safe mode and set `foreign_key_checks=1` in the downstream task session, the standard `DELETE` + `REPLACE` rewrite for `UPDATE` statements can trigger unintended `ON DELETE CASCADE` side effects on child rows. Starting from v8.5.6, DM includes two improvements to address this:

### Non-key `UPDATE` optimization

For `UPDATE` statements that do not change any primary key or unique key value, DM skips the `DELETE` step and emits only `REPLACE INTO`. Because the primary key is unchanged, `REPLACE INTO` overwrites the existing row without triggering a cascade delete. This optimization applies automatically in safe mode.

> For example, given the following upstream statement where `id` is the primary key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider the following upstream statement, where `id` is the primary key:
```

```sql
UPDATE dummydb.dummytbl SET int_value = 888999 WHERE id = 123;
```

> In previous versions, safe mode rewrites this as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In versions earlier than v8.5.6, safe mode rewrites this statement as follows:
```

```sql
DELETE FROM dummydb.dummytbl WHERE id = 123;       -- triggers ON DELETE CASCADE
REPLACE INTO dummydb.dummytbl (id, int_value, ...) VALUES (123, 888999, ...);
```

Starting from v8.5.6, safe mode rewrites this as:

```sql
REPLACE INTO dummydb.dummytbl (id, int_value, ...) VALUES (123, 888999, ...);  -- no cascade
```

> **Warning:**
>

> > `UPDATE` statements that change primary key or unique key values are rejected by a guardrail when `foreign_key_checks=1`. The task pauses with the error: `safe-mode update with foreign_key_checks=1 and PK/UK changes is not supported`. To replicate PK/UK-changing UPDATEs on tables with foreign keys, use `safe-mode: false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When `foreign_key_checks=1`, DM does not support `UPDATE` statements that modify primary key or unique key values. In this case, the task is paused with the error `safe-mode update with foreign_key_checks=1 and PK/UK changes is not supported`. To replicate such `UPDATE` statements on tables with foreign keys, set `safe-mode: false`.
```

    syncer-config-name: "global"            # Name of the syncers configuration.
```

## Foreign key handling <span class="version-mark">New in v8.5.6</span>

> **Warning:**
>

> > This feature is introduced in v8.5.6 and is experimental.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> This feature is experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. It might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues) on GitHub.
```

When you enable safe mode and set `foreign_key_checks=1` in the downstream task session, the default `DELETE` + `REPLACE` rewrite for `UPDATE` statements can trigger unintended `ON DELETE CASCADE` effects on child rows. Starting from v8.5.6, DM introduces the following improvements to address this issue.

### Non-key `UPDATE` optimization

> For `UPDATE` statements that do not modify primary key or unique key values, DM skips the `DELETE` step and executes only `REPLACE INTO`. Because the primary key remains unchanged, `REPLACE INTO` overwrites the existing row without triggering cascade deletes. This optimization is applied automatically in safe mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For `UPDATE` statements that do not modify primary key or unique key values, DM skips the `DELETE` step and executes only `REPLACE INTO`. Because the primary key remains unchanged, `REPLACE INTO` overwrites the existing row without triggering foreign key cascade deletes. This optimization is applied automatically in safe mode.
```

> For example, consider the following upstream statement, where `id` is the primary key:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take the following upstream statement as an example, where `id` is the primary key:
```

```sql
UPDATE dummydb.dummytbl SET int_value = 888999 WHERE id = 123;
```

In versions earlier than v8.5.6, safe mode rewrites this statement as follows:

```sql
DELETE FROM dummydb.dummytbl WHERE id = 123;       -- Triggers ON DELETE CASCADE
REPLACE INTO dummydb.dummytbl (id, int_value, ...) VALUES (123, 888999, ...);
```

Starting from v8.5.6, safe mode rewrites the statement as follows:

```sql
REPLACE INTO dummydb.dummytbl (id, int_value, ...) VALUES (123, 888999, ...);  -- No cascade
```

> **Warning:**
>

> > When `foreign_key_checks=1`, DM does not support `UPDATE` statements that modify primary key or unique key values. In this case, the task is paused with the error `safe-mode update with foreign_key_checks=1 and PK/UK changes is not supported`. To replicate such `UPDATE` statements on tables with foreign keys, set `safe-mode: false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> When `foreign_key_checks=1`, DM does not support replicating `UPDATE` statements that modify primary key or unique key values. In this case, the replication task is paused with the error `safe-mode update with foreign_key_checks=1 and PK/UK changes is not supported`. To replicate such `UPDATE` statements on tables with foreign keys, set `safe-mode: false`.
```

### Session-level `foreign_key_checks`

> During batch execution in safe mode, DM executes `SET SESSION foreign_key_checks=0` before executing `INSERT` and `UPDATE` batches, and restores the original value afterward. This prevents `REPLACE INTO` (which internally performs `DELETE` + `INSERT`) from triggering cascade operations in the downstream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During batch execution in safe mode, DM executes `SET SESSION foreign_key_checks=0` before executing `INSERT` and `UPDATE` batches, and restores the original value of `foreign_key_checks` afterward. This prevents `REPLACE INTO` (which internally performs `DELETE` + `INSERT`) from triggering foreign key cascade operations in the downstream.
```

This session-level setting introduces a small overhead per batch (two `SET SESSION` round trips). In most workloads, this overhead is negligible.

### Multi-worker foreign key causality

> When you set `worker-count` to a value greater than 1 and the task includes tables with foreign keys, DM reads foreign key relationships from the downstream `CREATE TABLE` schema when the task starts. For each DML operation, DM injects causality keys based on these relationships. This ensures that operations on parent rows and their dependent child rows are assigned to the same DML worker queue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you set `worker-count` to a value greater than 1 and the replication task includes tables with foreign keys, DM reads foreign key relationships from the downstream `CREATE TABLE` schema when the task starts. For each DML operation, DM injects causality keys based on these relationships. This ensures that operations on parent rows and their dependent child rows are assigned to the same DML worker queue.
```
